This is session 152, Cocoa Tips, Tricks,
and Debugging Techniques.
My name's Ken Ferrry.
I'm a software engineer on
the Cocoa Frameworks team.
And again, thank you for coming.
So the overall goal for this talk
is that I would like you to be able
to come to a greater understanding
of sort of the Cocoa mindset,
the worldview that we have,
because we do have a worldview.
And if you properly understand it,
it's pretty easy to
work with our framework.
So you can sort of
predict how things behave.
And when you look at a new API, you say,
OK, I know how that works.
And when you're writing your own code,
similarly, you can write it in our style.
So when you're reading it in six months,
you can still understand it.
But that's a little general.
So how are we actually going
to try to address this?
There are a couple different ways.
First of all,
I'm going to try to show you just
some sort of snippets of code,
small,
interesting bits that you can find in the
framework that you might or might not run
into yourself but are good to know about.
And hopefully,
understanding some of these issues
will help you to sort of solidify
the edges again on your understanding
of the framework as a whole.
However,
I can't really cover too many snippets
like that in an hour-long talk.
So most of the talk is not
going to be that exactly.
It's going to be how you
would discover such little
interesting tidbits on your own.
So it's going to be covering
the documentation a little bit,
F script,
which is an interesting environment
for Cocoa programming that you
may or may not be aware of,
and GDB,
which you almost certainly are aware of.
It's the debugger installed
with your developer tools.
For the tidbits,
which I'm calling case studies up here,
that's going to be sort
of mixed throughout the
entire talk to some degree.
We're just going to see.
While we're doing
something with F script,
say,
we'll find a few interesting bits that
I think are interesting by themselves.
But we're mostly going to see those as a
part of everything else that we're doing.
But first,
I do want to go through one particular
case study in a fair bit of depth,
just maybe as a warm-up a little bit,
and it is also a little bit interesting,
though maybe a little bit surprising.
And that is trying to implement in
an NSL subclass the copy method.
So the reason I bring this up is because,
unfortunately, like I said,
we try to be very consistent.
We try to follow the
principle of least surprise.
But it's a sizable framework,
and there are a few spots that don't
behave the way you might expect.
And this is unfortunately one of them.
So here we have a cell
subclass called fancy cell.
There's not much to it.
I'm sure it draws something beautiful.
But in terms of instance variables,
it just has one additional
instance variable,
which is a fancy color of some sort.
And we implemented a copy
with zone method like this.
So all we did is we
overrode copy with zone.
We called super to let cell do whatever
it thought was appropriate for copying.
And then we took our fancy color and
set it into the new copy of the cell.
Unfortunately, this is not good code.
This will probably crash.
Some of you might be
looking and thinking,
oh, I can see something wrong with that.
That looks like a latent bug.
But it's not just latent.
This is probably a crashing bug.
If the copying method ever gets called.
If you want to try to figure this out,
figure it out quick,
because I'm just about
to tell you what it is.
Can you say that again?
Is it because we're
trying to make an image?
He's asking if it has something to
do with mutability and immutability,
and the answer is no, it does not.
So good try, though,
and you had to do it quickly.
So the problem is that there
is a function defined in
Cocoa called NSCopyObject,
which is somewhat unique and
does not behave the way most
things in the app kit behave.
So what it does is it creates a
complete memory copy of an object.
If you have an object whose
instance variables take 100k,
say, then what you do when you call
NSCopyObject is it will create a new
block of memory of the appropriate size,
and it will just, as bytes,
take the first one and
just smash it over,
which is obviously kind of fast.
But there are things that happen
with this that are very surprising
from a Cocoa perspective.
So in particular,
you don't generally expect your
superclass to be able to have
any effect on your own variables.
It just doesn't have any
way to reference them.
It doesn't know they exist.
But in this particular case,
it will manage to modify them,
and that can cause some trouble.
I do want to mention that
this is documented well.
We'll cover that later as part of
when we try to debug our issues,
sort of.
But I don't want you to think that this
is just something completely mysterious.
So what happens in this particular case?
The first thing we did, again,
is we called the super,
and we said copy with zone,
which is going to create a new
instance and partially initialize it.
So that is, it's going to initialize
it to the NSCell level.
But among other things,
because of this call to NSCopy object,
which NSCell uses-- maybe
I didn't mention that yet.
It's actually the only place
NSCopy object is used in our code.
It's going to have the effect of
doing what I wrote at the very top.
You can think of it as saying,
just going directly to the
instance variable and setting
the fancy color in the copy to be
the fancy color in the original.
In particular, though,
it doesn't retain it,
because it doesn't know
enough to retain the objects.
It's just copying them as bytes.
So if we look at the
set fancy color method,
and this is a properly
implemented accessor,
the first thing it does is it
checks if the color coming in to
the copied cell is the same as
the color that's already there.
And if it is, it just bails out and
does nothing at all.
And it is actually going to be
the same because of this NSCopy
object method that was invoked by a
function that was called by NSCell.
So again, somehow in the copy,
we're going to end up with
the fancy color will be set,
but it was never retained.
So indeed,
when we go look at our dealloc method,
it's going to release the color,
which is appropriate,
but there's no balancing retain.
So that is very likely eventually
going to cause a crash,
provided anybody ever actually
tries to copy the cell.
There now are a few things
to think about with that.
So first of all,
the crash is going to be delayed.
We're not really sure when it's
going to happen because we just had
this memory management issue where
when the copy gets deallocated,
the color will get
released an extra time.
That might deallocate the color.
That might just drop its
release count by one.
Hard to say exactly.
Now,
a secondary issue that you might want
to think about is that you might say,
well, it doesn't really matter to me if
this copy method doesn't work because
I'm never going to copy the cell.
But now this is an interesting
thing about frameworks in general
is that you kind of can't make
that kind of decision because you
pass the cell off to the framework,
say if you put it in a table view,
and the framework kind of runs the show.
We'll do all sorts of stuff with it,
and you can't guarantee.
Because NSCell implements NSCopying,
it's your responsibility
to do it in subclasses.
And in fact, NSTableView will copy cells
for you whenever you click one.
That's whenever you click a cell.
That is sort of an implementation
detail for NSTableView.
It's not the kind of
thing you want to rely on,
but it'll happen,
and it will make a difference
in this particular circumstance
if you made this other mistake.
If you do everything perfectly,
then no problems.
OK.
So.
So basically what happens if we end up,
if we run this, we put it in table view,
we see the table view,
it looks all great.
We click it twice, and it crashes.
And the crash, oh, sorry.
First, I do want to say,
so that seemed very unfortunate.
So what is it that we
should be doing instead?
The answer is that in the
copy with zone method,
it's not a good idea to call accessors.
You really want to go directly to
the instance variables and set them.
This looks a little funny to
a Cocoa programmer at first.
So this is another one of these defining
the edges where figuring out exactly
what it is you're supposed to be doing.
This looks funny because usually we
don't use that dereferencing operator,
the arrow, at all.
And we certainly usually wouldn't
use it on an object other than self.
But if you think about it,
this actually is
appropriate in this case.
Let's think about a slightly
different case first.
Let's think about it in a knit method.
People,
a lot of people are sort of aware that
it's a bad idea to call accessor methods,
or at least public accessor
methods from an init method.
The issue there is that the object
has only been partially initialized if
you're in the middle of an init method.
And if you call out to a
public method like an accessor,
then subclassers have to somehow
be aware that they might get,
their code might be running when the
object is not fully constructed yet.
So you generally want to avoid
that kind of assumption at all.
I hope that makes sense.
So in an init method,
you generally also want to go
directly to the instance variables.
Now the thing is that a copy with zone
really is the init method for the copy.
It looks a little bit different because
it's not self that we're initializing,
it's the copy.
But we're not violating
encapsulation here.
It's the same class.
We already have complete knowledge of it.
It's not,
usually the reason why you don't
want to use that dereferencing
operator is because you're
destroying your encapsulation
And that's not true in this case.
So that's why that is both why
this is going to work in this case.
I mean, you can just see we sort of
explicitly set the fancy color to
be a copy of our original color.
But it's also just good in general.
So if we had been writing the
copy with zone method with
exactly the right pattern,
then we wouldn't have
even noticed this issue.
So I think it's good to notice the
issue because then it won't bite
you when you're not expecting it.
Okay, so a little bit of advice here
regarding some of what we've just seen.
So don't use NSCopyObject.
It does behave the way we generally
don't expect as Cocoa programmers.
And there's some,
I think it's understandable
to kind of want to use it.
When you find something
that behaves a little oddly,
you say, oh, that's really interesting.
And I think this is interesting.
I think NSCopyObject is kind of,
you know, it's worth knowing about.
But it's definitely for
very specialized use cases.
And generally,
when you find one of these sort
of corners in the framework,
what you really want to do is just,
stay the heck away.
The important thing is knowing where
the corners are so you can do that.
Okay, but more important than that,
really,
is to say that you don't want to say, oh,
NSCell is using NSCopyObject,
so I don't really have to
copy any of my scalers.
It's going to handle it for me.
That's not a good idea at all
because we might change this.
It really would be kind
of nice to change it,
I think, because of the sort of
behaviors I'm talking about.
But there are other trade-offs.
Okay.
So, we do care quite a bit
about binary compatibility.
Certainly,
something that people in this room want.
They want to see the framework improve.
They also want to see when they have
an application that works on Tiger,
they want to see it work on Leopard.
So, we do have to pick and choose
a little bit where we try
to make these improvements.
In this case,
if we were going to change it,
we'd have to do something where
it only changes for applications
that are recompiled on Leopard.
Because, and we would mark this
in our release notes.
I'll talk about that a little bit later.
Because, because, because,
it's too big of a change.
It's too easy to accidentally
rely on this working.
In fact, we've done it ourselves.
That's where I ran into this.
That's how I know about it.
So what does the crash
actually look like?
The reason I want to bring this up is
because you look at the-- so this is what
you get if you create such an object and
then click on it twice in a table view.
This, at first glance,
to some programmers might look like, oh,
it's an AppKit bug,
because you look at the call stack
and there's no client code at all.
It's all completely internal.
But you can see that
that wasn't the case.
There was something that
was wrong in client code,
but it was passed off to the framework,
and the error didn't manifest
until a little bit later.
First of all, for a recently experienced
Cocoa programmer,
it is fairly clear what happened here.
This looks like a prematurely
deallocated object.
Let's discuss how you recognize
that case a little bit.
First of all, if you see crashes in
an obse message send,
it's almost always a
prematurely deallocated object,
just because if there are
bugs in an obse message send,
we're going to find them pretty fast.
Another way you're going
to see it is XC bad access.
That means you're trying to... get at
some bit of memory that you cannot,
or you're trying to access
something you can't,
and often that's going to be a
prematurely deallocated object.
Perhaps a slightly more interesting one,
well, not that those aren't interesting,
but this one's interesting because
it's a little bit stranger looking,
is that if you see really odd-looking
selector not recognized messages,
if you get something like this,
you say NS sound doesn't respond
to the table view object value
for table column row method.
If this shows up in your console,
you might say, yeah, good question.
Good work there.
It really doesn't.
But why is this in my console?
And what happens here is that
if you have an object that
gets prematurely deallocated,
that same memory may be reused
for an entirely different object.
But in this case,
it would be that your data source,
which is not retained by the table view,
somehow got prematurely deallocated.
The space was reused for a sound,
but the table view was still pointing,
had the same pointer in it.
So it tried to send.
This data source message to the sound.
So what you would take away from that
particular message is that you have
a there's a problem with the memory
management for your data source.
Okay, so how would we go about
debugging this though?
If you go back to that backtrace,
it's a little bit mysterious.
It's just there's this crash.
We know that an object was
prematurely deallocated,
but we do not know
what the object is yet.
So there is a nice tool that's
definitely worth knowing about,
which is the NSZombiesEnabled
environment variable.
So let's talk about that for a minute,
and let's talk about what it does.
So if you set this environment variable,
which I'll show you in a minute,
objects will never
actually be deallocated.
They will be zombified.
So it will mark,
instead of actually freeing
any particular object,
when it gets down to the dialog method,
it will instead mark it as something
that was supposed to have been freed,
a zombie.
And then if you ever try to message it,
you'll get an error.
It won't crash anymore.
You'll get a log, and it'll give you some
interesting information.
It is also just worth mentioning.
So if you go back to the NSString,
it's going to really be
a core foundation object.
Though if you subclass it,
it's going to be a
core foundation object.
The point is that NSZombieEnabled will
never catch those bridged objects.
So when you create a standard NSString,
you need to use CFZombieLevel
to catch that particular case.
Okay, but anyway,
let's just see how this works.
So we would go to Xcode.
We would create,
you get this if you control
click on the executable in Xcode.
You get a chance to set
environment variables.
You would set NSZombie enabled to yes.
You run the app.
Like I said,
it's not going to crash anymore.
Instead, we get a log in the console.
It says selector release sent
to a deallocated instance of
class NS calibrated RGB color.
So now we have more information.
Now we don't just know that an
object was prematurely deallocated.
We also know what kind of object it was.
It was a color.
So we might start wondering
about that fancy color.
But it gives us a little
bit more information.
It tells us to set a breakpoint and
has NSZombie release to debug it.
We set that breakpoint.
Here's what we get.
Not only is it a color,
but the color we're finding is getting,
we're trying to message it
within fancy cell dealloc.
So now we're totally sure
because there's only one thing
we're trying to message there,
and that is our fancy color.
So we're pretty sure what's going on.
We screwed up the memory
management for the color.
OK, that's great.
But we're still a little confused
because we don't know why it's wrong.
So what are we going to do?
And the answer is, in this case,
that we're going to go
for the documentation.
So when you know it's a
memory management error,
one of the nice things about
Cocoa's memory management-- well,
classic memory management now.
Garbage collection would be even easier,
of course,
in this case-- is that we tend to
isolate our memory management code.
So in the case of the cell subclass,
chances are the only places where
retain or release are ever sent
are going to be in the init method,
the copy method, the dealloc method,
and the accessors.
So we can kind of go through those.
We can say,
I know the init method's right.
I know the dealloc method's right.
There's nothing to it.
I know my accessor's right.
And at some point, we're going to say,
OK, well, by process of elimination,
I thought I knew how
to write a copy method,
but I guess I didn't.
Or maybe you just start looking
through documentation again.
Anyway, the place where you go,
first of all,
is you go to the NSCopying protocol.
You read through that.
You don't see any information.
So you go up to the conceptual doc level,
and you start to read through that.
And indeed, if you look,
there's a whole section
implementing option copy,
and there's a major heading which
talks specifically about NSCopyObject.
It says-- this is the first sentence,
I think, in the section-- you must
consider the possibility that
the superclass implementation
uses the NSCopyObject function.
So in some sense, we all should have read
that documentation.
We probably mostly have.
But I, at least, didn't remember it.
Why didn't I remember?
Probably because I read that
NSCopying information within the
first few weeks of Cocoa programming.
And at the time,
I didn't realize that that
was at all interesting.
I couldn't distinguish between that
and the more usual Cocoa patterns,
which I was also learning at the time.
Okay, but that is very typical.
So I do want to emphasize now,
I think for some of the people
who have been around for a while,
some people tend to think of our
documentation as not being so great.
For a while, it had a lot of things like
documentation forthcoming,
or was it description forthcoming?
I'm not quite sure now.
Okay.
Anyway,
but that's really not true anymore.
The documentation is very
solid and tells you pretty much
everything you need to know.
But one thing we don't document,
to my knowledge,
is sort of how you go about
using the documentation.
There is a pattern to it.
For an experienced Cocoa developer,
you always want to go for
the API documentation first.
If you have a string question,
go look at the NSString docs.
When that fails you,
or when you don't see what you
want to know at that point,
you want to go up and read
the conceptual documentation,
typically linked at the top
of the API documentation file.
And then once you've read
through any information that
looks relevant at that level,
that's when you want to go to Google.
That's when you want to start
searching the mailing list,
trying to find some good information.
It is worth noting also, though,
for people who are
somewhat more new to Cocoa,
it's not really worth reading the
API documentation until you understand
our four or five sort of design patterns
that are used just absolutely everywhere.
You have to understand our
memory management scheme,
you have to understand delegates,
notifications,
just a few things like that.
Last,
I did want to mention the release notes.
In the AppKit group,
we absolutely assume that you're
reading our release notes,
because there are going
to be changes that we,
when we do make a change,
like I was mentioning with NSString,
we're going to be doing a lot of changes.
So if you have a nice copy object where
there's a chance that it could break you
if you recompile your app on Leopard,
that is, the release notes are where
that information is going to be.
So that is sort of required reading.
Okay, that is all I have to
say about NSCOPY Object.
So now I'm going to go on
and the documentation too.
So now we're going to go on and
talk about F-Script a little bit.
So F-Script is a tool which you
may or may not be familiar with,
but it is an aid for this talk anyway.
It's many things,
but for this talk I want to talk
about it as an aid for debugging
your Objective-C application
and exploring Cocoa and learning
how to use the framework.
So
So certainly a lot of authoring
an app is exploration.
So you have something you want to do,
and you don't know how to do it.
What do you do when you're
in this circumstance?
The first thing you want to
do is go to the documentation,
but then you probably do want
to run some sort of experiments.
You want to solidify that
knowledge one way or another.
A lot of people will go write a
small Objective-C test application
just to exercise their knowledge.
That's a good thing to do.
Another alternative, though,
is to use something like F-Script.
F-Script is a runtime
interactive scripting language
that lets you work with Cocoa.
It's really a lot like Objective-C.
It's designed for use with Cocoa.
It has no life outside of Cocoa.
It looks a lot like
Objective-C without brackets.
We're going to demo it,
and we're going to look at
the syntax a little bit.
But like I said, the really interesting
part is that it's very,
very runtime, and it lets you add your
Objective-C object model.
It's free and open source.
It's BSD licensed.
The author is Philippe Mougin,
who is in the audience
somewhere here today.
You can take a bow
afterwards or something,
I guess.
And it's really a pretty good tool.
So mostly what I want to do
is demo it for you and talk
about while I'm demoing it.
But I don't want to get lost,
so I do have to give you a
little bit of a syntax primer.
As I said,
it really looks a lot like Objective-C.
There's a few differences.
So in Objective-C, we surround message
invocations with brackets.
In F-Script,
you don't need to type anything there.
If you need to disambiguate
the order of message sends,
you can use parentheses.
But in circumstances where it's not
required and there's a precedence rule,
then you just don't need
to type anything at all.
For assignment,
you don't use equals operator.
You use the colon equals operator.
No big deal.
For string literals,
instead of using at quotes,
you don't use equals operator.
You use the colon equals operator.
No big deal.
For string literals,
instead of using at quotes,
you use single quotes.
And everything in F-Script is an object.
They're all basically typed id.
So we don't bother to
declare variable types.
There's no utility to it.
OK, so if I could have the demo machine,
I'd like to show this off a little bit.
What we're going to do is
we're going to use everybody's
favorite demo application,
which is TextEdit.
And we're going to say,
suppose that we are interested in,
for some reason,
programmatically adding an image
to this menu item right here,
this automatic menu item.
Okay, now the reason why we're
bothering to do this,
why we're bothering to experiment
with this at all is that we went
and looked at documentation,
and we noticed that it actually
says that the set image method on
NSPopupButton doesn't do anything.
And that's because the image
actually comes from the menu items,
which are inside.
So rather than setting the image
on the pop-up button itself,
we're going to get its first
menu item and set an image there.
Okay, but first of all,
so you might notice that TextEdit looks
a little tiny bit different than usual.
It has an extra menu up there, FSA.
That stands for F-Script Anywhere,
which is to say that it's
running in your application as
opposed to its own application.
Now,
an interesting feature of this is that
I did not alter the TextEdit project.
The Xcode project has not been modified.
There are no extra nibs.
I didn't programmatically add this menu.
It was injected at
runtime using Mach inject.
So this is actually kind of nice
because it lets you work with your
application without messing with
your Xcode project whatsoever.
You can be sure you're not messing it up.
You're just doing some debugging
or exploration or something.
So anyway, let's pull this up.
So I was telling you that it was in
some way interactive and runtime.
And what I mean by that is here
we have a flashing cursor prompt.
If I type NSImage.
Well, it does something or other.
That's actually printing the description
method for the NSImage class object.
And if I say image named exactly
as I did in the sample before.
If I can type.
Okay.
Well, we just printed out an image.
And at this point,
I almost want to stop and just
look at this for a minute,
because it's pretty great.
We're just completely
working with Cocoa Runtime.
There was no need to
compile anything at all.
And this is completely a
feature of Objective-C.
It's just so dynamic.
And we all know that,
but it just becomes so much more obvious
when you start working with it like this.
You realize it hardly
even needs to be compiled.
It's faster if it's compiled,
but we can do pretty much
everything we want at runtime.
So let's go ahead and give this a name.
I'm going to call that app icon and use
the colon equals operator to assign.
And now if I refer to that,
I have this icon here.
So let's go ahead and try to set this.
So this is the interpreter
that I mentioned before,
but there is a second
component to F-Script-- well,
second in some sense--
which is the object browser.
So this is pretty good.
So right here we have something
in this leftmost column,
which is App Icon.
If I click on it, what are we seeing?
We're seeing lots of
properties of that image.
Furthermore, if we go down,
we're not just seeing properties,
we're seeing methods.
And if I were to click on one of these,
it will actually invoke the method.
So hasAlpha is true for this image.
You may be used to this sort of thing.
This is somewhat similar
to the DOM browser that you
might use for web development,
or it's a little bit similar to
the Accessibility Inspector that
comes installed in the machine if
you're doing accessibility work.
But this is obviously sort
of explicitly for Cocoa.
We're looking at the Cocoa object
hierarchy as opposed to the accessibility
hierarchy or as opposed to the DOM.
Anyway, so this is pretty good, too.
I'm going to click the
Select View button,
which allows me to go over and just
click on the pop-up button over here,
and now I get a pointer to it.
Uh...
So I could name this variable,
I could name a pop-up, this object,
and if I were to go over
here and print it out,
now I have a pointer to the
pop-up that I can work with.
But I'm not even going to do that.
So first I'm going to verify
what we saw in the documentation.
I'm going to call setImage
here with the app icon,
and we expect nothing.
"And, oh, we actually got something.
So it removed the title.
And I do know what's going on here.
That was a little bit of a setup.
What happened is that the
pop-up button happens to be
configured for NSImage only.
So when it has an image and a title,
it tries to--
"Not use the title at all.
But unfortunately in this case it
won't display the image either.
So that should have restarted.
Okay.
Let's try to fix that up quickly.
"Is that better?
Okay, that's a little better.
All right.
So moving on.
So now we're going to try to do it
the way we were intended to do it.
Oh, I'm sorry.
I meant to mention.
So we have this large list over here,
which is a little bit hard to
manage in some ways just because
there's so much information.
But if we click over
here in the search field,
we can filter it.
So if I type image,
we're only seeing properties and
methods that have image in the name.
If I type menu,
we're only going to see the menu items.
If I go over here and set
the image for this menu item,
Then there it is.
Oh,
but that was a little bit interesting,
too.
We see that as it happens,
a menu item's not going to
resize an image for you.
OK, so that was interesting information.
That may or may not have
just saved us a recompile,
because now we know that we
have to size the image first.
So if we take our app icon--
and we call setSize.
This is-- I'll cover this in a minute.
This is one of the slightly
unfortunate features about F-Script.
It can't deal with any C types.
So if you want to pass
something around like a size,
there are a few extensions to create one.
OK, that sets its size.
We can see it printed out there.
The size is 13 by 13.
By the way, also note the image reps.
Oftentimes with images,
it actually can be quite useful to be
able to see what the image reps are.
Let's clear that and set
it to the app icon again.
And this time it worked.
Okay, can I have the slides back, please?
All right,
so let's go through that a little bit.
Let's think about what we just
saw and what was good about it,
what we really gained.
So we were just using
point-and-click debugging.
You saw I clicked this browse button,
and I clicked on the pop-up button,
and I was able to work
with the pop-up button.
What was so good about that?
Well, for one thing,
we didn't have to chase
down the relevant code.
We were also able to tell
what the relevant code was.
I don't know if you noticed,
but the class name for that pop-up button
was "Encoding Pop-up Button." So if
I find that I do need to alter the code,
I know where to go.
This is a good time saver.
When you just need to
work with something,
you don't necessarily
need its source code.
slightly more subtle point,
we don't end up making as many
assumptions about the state of an
object when we work with F script as we
do when we're usually debugging things.
Normally we get into a situation where
we say I know how this is configured
because I configured it back here so
that's probably how what it is now.
But you don't really know if it might
have changed in the interim and you
have to sort of reason about it.
If you're using something like F script
you don't know why an object is
configured the way it is necessarily but
you know exactly how it is configured.
You can just look at its properties
and see what it is right now.
Also good when something goes wrong.
You load up F script and
you say oh why isn't,
what's wrong there?
Why don't I see text?
Oh because my text is the
empty string for some reason.
Okay so somebody set
it to the empty string.
You saw the way I was using
the search field up there.
That can be a good way to avoid sort
of unnecessary in some circumstances
trips to the documentation.
An example of that might be if
you have a window that you're
moving around for some reason.
Well if you're
[Transcript missing]
OK, so let's just do a few other
quick little things that are
sort of interesting with this.
So can I have the demo
machine back again?
Okay, so if you've been reading
our documentation,
you know that we have sort
of this interesting concept,
which is the field editor.
The field editor is a text field object.
It's actually sort of kind of
dumb or dumber than you'd think.
It doesn't really do text layout.
It doesn't do text editing.
It doesn't do very much at all
other than just sort of contain.
But whenever there is real
text editing to be done,
a field editor object,
which is a text view,
gets swapped in on top.
So it's sort of very transparent,
but when I change between fields here,
what the documentation would have
you believe is that there is a
single shared text view that's
being used in different places.
Well,
we can at least sort of start to at least
believe the documentation a little bit.
If I go over here and click with
F-Script on the second field,
which is not the one which has focus,
I see that it's an NSText field.
But if I click on the first one,
it's a text view.
So yeah, there's a field editor there,
and it sort of demonstrates.
extremely different.
And we can see, for example,
if we were to go get the
delegate of the text view,
we'd find that it was the original field.
So that's the way that gets set up.
Okay, that's interesting.
And then a question I had
a few months ago was,
how about for non-editable text
fields but selectable text fields?
It seems like selection is a little
too complicated for something
like a text field to handle.
So is that handled by the field editor?
Well, let's find out.
So I'm going to click over
here on this text field,
which is not editable,
but for purposes of the demonstration,
I want to make it editable.
So the first thing we're going
to do is call set editable,
and F-Script uses true instead of yes,
and now it is editable,
so I can select in there.
Okay.
Thank you.
So now I'll select again
and the question is,
is it a text field or is it a text view?
And view.
Okay, that uses the field editor.
Now we know.
Not necessarily again, I mean, I'm not,
again, you don't necessarily want to rely
on the things you find this way,
but it's really a good way to
further your Cocoa understanding.
Can I have the slides back, please?
Okay, yeah, which is exactly what I want
to talk about right now.
So let's speak about encapsulation,
which you may be wondering about
a little bit given some of this.
So it's very, very white box,
which is to say you can just
see everything about everything.
Nothing is hidden.
Very nice for debugging.
Let's you figure out what's going on.
Not so nice for a few other reasons,
especially from our point of view.
You're going to see private
methods when you do this.
F-Script cannot distinguish between
public methods and private methods.
Basically,
the point here is that we treat
developers with a lot of respect,
and Objective-C treats
developers with a lot of respect.
There is no such thing as a
private method in Objective-C.
All there is is a method that we
haven't bothered to tell you about.
That doesn't mean that
you should use them.
In fact, it means the opposite.
It means that you have a
strong responsibility to
respect the encapsulation
boundaries that we have set up,
and it's in everybody's best
interest that you do so.
You want us to improve the frameworks.
You also don't want your programs to
crash when they're run on Leopard.
Basically,
the only way that we can make that
work is if you agree to adhere
to the contract that we set up.
But this just becomes very,
very obvious with F-Script,
so don't overdo it.
You can get excited and you
can see what's going on.
That's great.
There's nothing wrong
with understanding Cocoa.
But you need to keep a very clear
division between what you understand
and what's sort of understood by
your code at any particular time.
OK, let's go very quickly through some
things the interpreter is not good for,
just lest you think it's panacea.
Actually, I may not pronounce it right.
So it's not very good for anything
you have to do multiple times.
So every time the
application gets launched.
Not good for unit tests,
because they won't get run.
Or rather, it's not good in situations
where you might use unit tests.
If you want to
interactively check things,
that's great.
But it's not going to get automatically
run every time your app is compiled.
So it's not good for unit
testing when used in this way.
I just wanted to point out that there
wasn't support for creating classes
in Fscript until fairly recently.
I think really what this tells you is
that it's not that useful in a way.
It's nice to have support
for creating classes.
But Fscript got on for years
and years and years without it.
And that's just because it's not trying
to replace the Objective-C model.
It's using it.
It's just part of it.
Oh, I did want to mention that.
So another alternative to
Fscript is-- PyOpc and Python,
things like that.
They fulfill a lot of the same--
they help in a lot of the same ways.
I wanted to cover Fscript maybe
because I think it's great.
And also because it's
not as well covered,
I think, as PyOpc.
But that has many of the same benefits.
OK, like I said,
when you're working with non-objects,
Fscript's not so great.
It doesn't have any concept of C at all.
So you can't call functions.
And if you need to create structs,
there have been additions
made to Fscript.
They'll let you do that.
Things like sizes, as you saw.
Stepping through long
sequences of function calls.
I guess you could do it.
You could always paste some code
over and go through one by one line.
But it's not so great.
Maybe you want to use
GDB for that instead.
It's better for high-level
interaction bugs.
Memory management is just
very naive reference counting.
So you might have been wondering
what was going on there.
I was just leaking when we
were running those demos.
But what happens is that whenever
you name an object in Fscript,
that sends it a retain message.
If you ever assign something else to
that name or assign nil to the name,
that will release it.
Okay, that's fine.
That will sort of tend to keep
things around for as long as
you want for the most part.
It will also tend to leak
in a lot of circumstances.
If you ever end up with a cycle,
it's never going away.
But it's just not that big a
deal because we're generally,
at least the way I was using it here,
we're not sort of doing real
programming with Fscript.
We're just exploring.
Okay, sometimes Fscript can change
the behavior of your app.
This actually happens in TextEdit,
which is one of the reasons
I was using it as an example,
actually.
Fscript has a save
method that comes from,
I think, Smalltalk,
that it adds as an NSObject category.
Well, it happens that TextEdit
uses save as the action,
that the save menu item.
is connected to.
So basically,
the responder chain gets all screwed
up and you can't save documents.
So, not so good.
Hopefully,
it won't happen in your own apps,
but you definitely don't want
to get fooled if it does.
But like I said,
since you're not actually
adding it to the Xcode project,
it's not a permanent problem.
And I do still want to emphasize,
using Fscript makes you a
sophisticated programmer.
And you cannot start using
all the private stuff that you
are probably going to find.
Okay, just a quick note on
installation and getting started.
There's not much to it.
You have to drag that.
This is what the bundle,
the package looks like
when you download it.
You need to drag the framework
out to your frameworks folder,
say in your library.
Then you want to click
on either Fscript.app.
That'll just bring up an
interpreter where you can
start working with the system.
Or for the kind of things we're doing,
where you're actually using
it to debug your existing app,
that's where you want
to use Fscript anywhere.
That'll show you how to
inject it into your own app.
And you can set it up so it injects
automatically every time the app is run,
which gives you good debugging.
Okay, so let us go on to sort of
the last section of our talk,
which is GDB.
So GDB is the debugger that
comes with your developer tools.
And it definitely fulfills a different
niche than the interpreters do.
And that's actually one
of the great things,
I think, about these tools,
because they do complement each other.
Sorry,
I did want to say that it's good when you
end up wanting to go down into a method,
when you say,
this particular method does not work,
as opposed to the way these methods
are wired together does not work.
That's when you want to use GDB.
Or maybe once you've narrowed
the problem down a little bit.
OK, so I'm not going to
cover GDB a whole lot.
But in particular,
since the Xcode guys are
mostly interested in talking
about GDB within Xcode,
just for variety,
let's talk about GDB not
from within Xcode,
using Xcode's console,
which gets you something a lot
closer to command line GDB.
Definitely also useful.
A lot of people I know really only
use this mode of working with GDB.
I pretty much only use this mode, though.
I really do like a lot of
the new features in Xcode.
So for people who aren't aware of it,
I think it's worth looking at.
But since this is a Cocoa Talk,
I want to talk about some of
the things that are really
specific to Cocoa about it.
Print Objects If you find yourself typing
in GDB things like "nslog_perend @% @,
object_perend," you
don't need to do that.
I'm not quite sure how
people find these things.
I think I just stumbled on it.
But there's a P-O.
If you just say P-O object in GDB,
that'll print it out.
I'm sure a lot of people know that,
but I bet a lot of people don't.
You can also set variables in a debugger,
sort of debugger-level variables,
as opposed to things you already have
space allocated for in your source.
That's used.
Set $VARIABLE_NAME equals
something or other.
And you can set breakpoints
from the command line as well.
And this is the syntax.
So either break on a function,
for example,
or break on our standard way of
writing out an Objective-C method.
So dash or plus if it's a class method,
brackets, class name, method name, colon,
and colons as appropriate.
Ken Ferrry Print Objects Okay, so, uh...
In particular, there are,
for working with Cocoa,
some breakpoints that a lot of
people like to set all the time,
at least some of them,
because they almost
always signal app error.
If you ever see an
exception raised in Cocoa,
it always means something has gone wrong.
This is something that people from other
languages like Java or Python don't
necessarily realize about Cocoa,
but the way we use exceptions is that
they always signal programmer error.
You will not even see exceptions
raised and caught internally to
the frameworks that we create.
You won't see that within GapKit or
anything like that at all.
If you ever see an exception raised,
it means something has gone wrong.
So it's a good idea to
put a breakpoint on that.
Now, you do also need to put a
breakpoint on obse exception throw.
This is because there's a
language extension made,
maybe in the 10.2 timeframe,
the at throw directive,
which basically just brought
exception support down to the
language level instead of being done.
So you can do that at the Cocoa level.
But it doesn't go through
quite the same path yet.
We'd like to make it go
through the same path,
but it doesn't today,
so you need to set two breakpoints.
AutoZone resurrect.
So this is a new breakpoint
that you want to set if you're
working with garbage collection.
So we already talked about zombies,
which is one way objects fail to die.
Unfortunately,
there's also resurrection now,
so we're sort of going through
all these possibilities.
But resurrection is a lot
less nice than zombies.
Resurrection occurs when
there's an object which has
been marked for deletion,
but has somehow been added
to an object which is live,
and then suddenly is
supposed to be live again.
That's very bad for our collector.
I won't go into that
too much because Blaine,
I think, did actually a pretty nice
job of covering this in his
garbage collection talk,
and it was packed,
so I bet you were all there.
Now, unfortunately,
this doesn't... In our own testing,
we found that at the moment,
at least in your seed,
the AutoZone resurrect does
not catch all of the GC errors
that you might hope it would.
So another good breakpoint
to set is malloc printf.
That's when you see messages
logged in the console,
and this will show you what's
going on in some cases.
You probably don't want to
set that one all the time.
Okay,
so another nice thing that you can do
in the console in GDB that you cannot
do right now in the UI is print out...
[Transcript missing]
So it does happen that if you
set a breakpoint on one of
those internal app get methods,
even though you can't say po self,
because there's no local
variable named self,
you can still figure out
how to print that out.
You can print out all your parameters.
So up here what I have on the slide is,
oh, sorry,
and the way that works basically is
that the compiler has conventions for
how it passes arguments to a function.
So when a function gets invoked, so okay,
so execution jumps to that point,
but it has to know where to find
the arguments to the function.
And that all has to be documented
or else things don't work right.
And it is documented.
I have the full URL at the bottom.
It's different on
different architectures.
It's also different with
different argument types.
What I put on the board here is
for when all your argument types
are all objects and returns too.
But it's still very useful.
And even if you're not going to
memorize all of the documentation
for how the calling can work,
so how you would print everything out,
you don't really need to.
I mean, even just what I put up
here is pretty useful.
So on PowerPC, you find your arguments
in registers usually.
So self is always going to be in $R3.
This is only when you
break on the method itself.
Since it's a register,
it'll get changed in the
course of the method.
But at the beginning, that's where it is.
The first Objective-C argument
you're going to find in R5,
and then more arguments 6 through 10,
and the result is in R3.
So it's not actually exactly the same,
but in this case, it's the same.
X86-64, similarly,
arguments are passed in registers.
You kind of see the odd
one out here is on I386.
If you want to print out your
arguments in methods where
you don't have the source,
it's quite a bit different.
The reason here is that I386 doesn't
have very many registers to work with,
so arguments are passed on the stack.
We don't need to go into it too much,
I don't think.
This is just sort of
the magic invocation.
Everything is off by an
offset from this EBP register.
The nice thing about this, though,
is that actually on all
the other architectures,
you have to break right at
the beginning of the method if
you want to see the arguments.
If you go down,
then they're no longer going to be valid.
But on I-386,
because it's sort of on the stack,
it's permanent.
And you can see it throughout the
entire implementation of the method.
Okay.
Let's go back to the
machine for a minute.
This is an i386 machine,
and I just wanted to
show you how this works.
So I just launched
TextEdit in debugging mode,
and I'm going to pull up the console.
Okay, we're going to set a
breakpoint as we discussed.
Oops, I need to pause it first.
I think I can do that now with Control-C.
I'm going to set the breakpoint on,
since we were looking at it before,
NSL set image, colon, like that.
OK.
So that's a breakpoint.
I'm going to continue.
Go back to TextEdit.
Let's pull up a Preferences panel.
I happen to know this is
going to trigger the method.
So we just hit the breakpoint.
There's no source.
We're still going to
print everything out.
So, PO, Print Object, again, star,
id star, oops.
of, now it was $EBP plus 8.
Hi, I'm Ken Ferrhy,
and I'm a developer at GDB.
I'm going to talk about how to
manage your application with GDB.
In this case,
I'm going to talk about how to
manage your application with GDB.
In this case,
I'm going to talk about how to
manage your application with GDB.
Every object is off by
an offset from this EBP,
and they're all sort of sequential.
So because that first self
object takes four bytes,
Since we're on a 32-bit machine,
if we add 12 to this,
we're going to get the next argument.
Now, the next argument is...
In Objective-C,
when we make method calls,
those translate down to C calls that
have an implicit extra two parameters.
The first one is the self object.
It's really just a local variable.
There's nothing special about self.
And the second one is _cmd,
which identifies the current selector.
But we're going to print that out,
so we'll do NSSelector from String.
"And we'll go over here and... oh,
I screwed something up."
Oh, it wasn't an id.
Okay, I may be out of luck here,
but I'm going to have to reset.
What do you know?
Okay.
Am I in a reasonable place now?
Yeah, probably.
I should have read the message.
Okay, that's a little weird.
Okay, so that probably means that we
actually need to finish the...
Yeah, it's still, uh, oh, geez.
Let's just not do that one.
I'm restarting this now.
Anyways, that works perfectly fine if you
don't get yourself all confused.
But we did want to show the
argument to this one also,
which is what I'm going to do now.
And that's going to be
at abp plus 8 plus 4,
brought us up to 12,
plus another 4 for the selector,
brings us up to 16.
There it is.
And it's null.
It's nil.
So that can also be
interesting information.
Often passing nil to something
in Cocoa is a mistake.
Probably not in this case, though.
Certainly sending an
image to be nil is OK.
OK, can we go back to the slides, please?
That is actually most of my talk.
So I just have a few other
things I want to mention to you.
I do think it's a good idea to
just sort of try to figure out
how everything works in Cocoa,
even if you're not going
to use it in your code.
I mean,
it's definitely nice to understand
how the framework works.
A few interesting experiments
you can run for yourself.
Why don't you write a little app that
catches and logs all notifications?
If you register on the object nil
for the notification with name nil,
that'll just catch everything.
I've certainly written such an app.
I know Malcolm Crawford mentioned
to me that he's written such an app.
Lots of people have.
It's very useful.
Another thing you can do that's
sort of-- just to see what's flying
around while your app is running.
Another thing you can do is set
the nstraceEvent user default.
This will let you see what's
going on with events in your app.
Again, not the kind of thing that you
want to be relying on necessarily,
but it's very instructive just to
understand how this is all working.
Now here's another little tidbit,
I suppose, which is that when you want to
set a user default in your app,
you don't have to go to the command
line or to your plist to do that.
What you can do is in Xcode,
if you pass the arguments dash
and then the name of the default
and then the argument yes,
like this, so dash nstraceEvents yes as
an argument to your executable,
it will get pushed into NSUserDefaults.
This is a service that
NSApplication provides to you.
Works for all defaults.
So that's how I'd recommend
doing that in this case.
That's all I have to say about that.
And so we're down to the conclusion.
The conclusion is, like I said,
please work with this stuff.
Try to develop your mindset.
Understand how everything works
together so you can write your own
code in the same style as we do so
that we can understand your code,
you can understand our code.
Everything just works together great.
You've got various resources.
You have documentation.
I wanted to point out Fscript because,
again, I think a lot of people
don't know about it.
GDB, more people know about,
but they almost certainly don't
know about all its features.
And there's just all sorts
of good stuff available.
So have fun.
If you want some more information,
you can talk to Derek Horn,
who is our application
frameworks evangelist.
I wanted to point out the
APKIT API documentation,
because that's where I said is
always the first place to start.
There is an excellent,
excellent technical note,
which I probably should
have mentioned before this,
which is MacOSX debugging magic.
It's just an amazing amount
of information just about all
sorts of previously undocumented
tricks that you can use.
Fscript is at Fscript.org.
Philippe can also tell you more
about that to flag him down.
And debugging with GDB is
a nice little tutorial.